[doc][KubeRay] Add mTLS for RayClusters user guide (#65107)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/mtls.md

> (kuberay-mtls)=

Reviewer: This page has no front matter, so it has no `description`. Ray's style guide asks for [one on every page](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#front-matter), and search engines and the social preview card use it. The sibling `tls.md` has one, so this is also directory consistency.

```suggestion
---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: "Enable automated mutual TLS for RayCluster internal communication with the KubeRay RayClusterMTLS feature gate and cert-manager."
---

(kuberay-mtls)=
```

# Configuring mTLS for RayClusters

> KubeRay v1.7 introduces automated mTLS for RayCluster internal communication through the `RayClusterMTLS` feature gate. When enabled, the operator uses [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) to provision a full public key infrastructure — a self-signed CA and head and worker leaf certificates — and injects the necessary TLS environment variables and volume mounts into every Ray container, so you don't need to manage certificates manually.

Reviewer: Two em dashes here. The guide asks you to [avoid dashes and restructure instead](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#sentence-structure). Splitting into two sentences also shortens what's currently a fairly long one.

```suggestion
KubeRay v1.7 introduces automated mTLS for RayCluster internal communication through the `RayClusterMTLS` feature gate. When enabled, the operator uses [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) to provision a full public key infrastructure, consisting of a self-signed CA plus head and worker leaf certificates. It also injects the necessary TLS environment variables and volume mounts into every Ray container, so you don't need to manage certificates manually.
```

This guide covers the automated cert-manager approach. If you prefer to manage certificates yourself, for example with your own CA or init-container scripts, see {ref}`kuberay-tls`.

:::{warning}
`RayClusterMTLS` is an **alpha** feature gate (introduced in KubeRay v1.7, `Default: false`). Enable it explicitly before use. See [Install the KubeRay operator](#install-the-kuberay-operator) below.

Enabling TLS incurs a performance overhead from encryption and decryption of inter-process traffic. The impact is most noticeable in communication-intensive workloads: frequent large object transfers and small tasks with high invocation rates. Compute-bound workloads with minimal data movement see little to no overhead.
:::

## Prerequisites

- KubeRay operator v1.7 or later installed.
- [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/) installed in the cluster.
- `kubectl` installed and configured to interact with your cluster.

> You need to successfully install cert-manager on your Kubernetes cluster before enabling mTLS with KubeRay. See [cert-manager Installation](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/) for installation instructions.

Reviewer: This paragraph and the prerequisite bullet at L18 carry the same instruction and the same link, and the guide asks you to [link to a page once per section](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#links-and-cross-references).

Flagging rather than asserting, since I can see this came from @win5923's earlier suggestion: the Prerequisites list seems like the natural home, so the suggestion deletes the paragraph. Happy to be overruled if the standalone emphasis was the point.

```suggestion
```

## Install the KubeRay operator

> Install the KubeRay operator, following [these instructions](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/getting-started/kuberay-operator-installation.html). The minimum version for this guide is v1.7.0. To use this feature, you must enable the `RayClusterMTLS` feature gate. To enable the feature gate when installing the KubeRay operator, run the following command:

Reviewer: Two things here, and neither is really your fault, so please read this as a suggestion rather than a correction.

`https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/...` is a hardcoded URL to a page in this same repo. `/en/latest/` pins readers to the last release rather than the version they're browsing, and if the page moves the link rots silently instead of failing the build. "these instructions" is also non-descriptive link text, which the guide asks you to [avoid](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#links-and-cross-references).

The reason I say it isn't your fault: this wording is verbatim from `raycronjob-quick-start.md:65`, which is the page @win5923 pointed you at for style, and it has the same hardcoded link. That pre-existing instance isn't yours to fix.

`kuberay-operator-installation.md` has no MyST label, so `{ref}` isn't available. A relative Markdown link is the pattern used by `rayserve-llm-example.md` and `kuberay-serve-high-throughput.md`, and because the target is `.md` it's build-verified.

```suggestion
Install the KubeRay operator by following [Deploy a KubeRay operator](../getting-started/kuberay-operator-installation.md). The minimum version for this guide is v1.7.0. To use this feature, you must enable the `RayClusterMTLS` feature gate. To enable the feature gate when installing the KubeRay operator, run the following command:
```

The operator also injects a `wait-for-tls-ip-san` init container into each Ray pod. The init container blocks startup until cert-manager has added the pod's IP to the correct certificate.

The operator injects the following into every Ray container:

| Environment variable | Value |
|---|---|
| `RAY_USE_TLS` | `1` |
| `RAY_TLS_SERVER_CERT` | `/etc/ray/tls/tls.crt` |
| `RAY_TLS_SERVER_KEY` | `/etc/ray/tls/tls.key` |
| `RAY_TLS_CA_CERT` | `/etc/ray/tls/ca.crt` |

## Verify mTLS is active

Check that cert-manager created the resources and the cluster reached a ready state:

```bash
# Operator event confirming PKI is ready
kubectl get events -n <namespace> --field-selector reason=MTLSPKIReady

# Inspect the issued certificates
kubectl get certificates -n <namespace>
kubectl describe certificate ray-head-cert-raycluster-mtls -n <namespace>

# Confirm TLS env vars are present in a Ray pod
kubectl exec -it <ray-head-pod> -n <namespace> -- env | grep RAY_TLS
```

## Certificate renewal

> cert-manager automatically renews certificates before they expire. Leaf certificates are valid for 90 days and cert-manager begins renewal 15 days before expiry. However, **Ray reads TLS material only at process startup**. Running Ray processes don't hot-reload updated secrets. If cert-manager renews a certificate while the cluster is running, the pods continue using the original certificate until you restart them.

Reviewer: The guide [reserves bold](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#bold-and-italics) for UI elements, admonition lead-ins, and definition lists, and asks you not to bold prose for emphasis. Same pattern at L153 (`30,000 bytes for SANs`, `3,658 worker pods per cluster`) and L161 (`lower bound`).

This is the softest thing on my list. Bolding the key number in a scale-limit section genuinely helps a skimming reader, so if you and @andrewsykim prefer to keep it, that's a reasonable call and I won't press.

```suggestion
cert-manager automatically renews certificates before they expire. Leaf certificates are valid for 90 days and cert-manager begins renewal 15 days before expiry. However, Ray reads TLS material only at process startup. Running Ray processes don't hot-reload updated secrets. If cert-manager renews a certificate while the cluster is running, the pods continue using the original certificate until you restart them.
```

> For most workloads this isn't a concern because RayClusters are typically shorter-lived than the certificate validity period. For long-lived clusters, restart Ray pods after each renewal cycle:

Reviewer 2: We should consider adding some logic in Ray to periodically reload certificates to avoid this problem.

Author: Created an issue for it here https://github.com/ray-project/ray/issues/65365

```bash
kubectl delete pod -l ray.io/node-type=head,ray.io/cluster=<cluster-name> -n <namespace>
kubectl delete pods -l ray.io/node-type=worker,ray.io/cluster=<cluster-name> -n <namespace>
```

:::{warning}
Deleting the head pod terminates the Ray head node. Without {ref}`GCS fault tolerance <kuberay-gcs-ft>` enabled, this causes the loss of all cluster state, active jobs, and metadata. Don't run this on a production cluster without understanding the consequences and configuring GCS fault tolerance first.
:::

## Cluster scale limit

> The operator adds each worker pod's IP address as a Subject Alternative Name (SAN) in the shared worker certificate. cert-manager encodes each IPv4 address as roughly 6 bytes in Distinguished Encoding Rules form, which becomes about 8.2 bytes after Privacy Enhanced Mail base64 encoding.

Reviewer: The guide asks you to [define an acronym on first use](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#define-acronyms-on-first-use) with the acronym in parentheses. This spells both terms out in full but never introduces the short forms, and then L153 uses `maxLeafCertificatePEMSize`, where PEM appears unexplained.

```suggestion
The operator adds each worker pod's IP address as a Subject Alternative Name (SAN) in the shared worker certificate. cert-manager encodes each IPv4 address as roughly 6 bytes in Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER) form, which becomes about 8.2 bytes after Privacy Enhanced Mail (PEM) base64 encoding.
```

cert-manager v1.19 reserves a fixed budget of **30,000 bytes for SANs** within a `maxLeafCertificatePEMSize` of 36,500 bytes, giving a conservative lower bound of approximately **3,658 worker pods per cluster**:

> ```

Reviewer: This fence has no language tag. The guide asks you to [tag every fenced code block](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#code-blocks); `text` is the right one for a calculation.

````suggestion
```text
````

30,000 bytes ÷ 8.2 bytes/IP ≈ 3,658 IPs
```

> cert-manager v1.20 introduced `pemSizeLimitsConfig.maxCertificateSize`, which allows raising this limit if your clusters exceed ~3,500 workers.

Reviewer: "allows raising" describes what the field permits rather than [what you do with it](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#focus-on-what-the-reader-does). Also spells out `~`, since the guide asks for [words rather than symbols in prose](https://docs.ray.io/en/master/ray-contribute/writing-style.html#use-words-for-symbols-in-prose).

```suggestion
To raise this limit if your clusters exceed roughly 3,500 workers, use `pemSizeLimitsConfig.maxCertificateSize`, introduced in cert-manager v1.20.
```

This guide covers the automated cert-manager approach. If you prefer to manage certificates yourself, for example with your own CA or init-container scripts, see {ref}`kuberay-tls`.

:::{warning}
`RayClusterMTLS` is an **alpha** feature gate (introduced in KubeRay v1.7, `Default: false`). Enable it explicitly before use. See [Enable the feature gate](#enable-the-feature-gate) below.

Enabling TLS incurs a performance overhead from encryption and decryption of inter-process traffic. The impact is most noticeable in communication-intensive workloads: frequent large object transfers and small tasks with high invocation rates. Compute-bound workloads with minimal data movement see little to no overhead.
:::

## Prerequisites

- KubeRay operator v1.7 or later installed.
- [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/) installed in the cluster.
- `kubectl` installed and configured to interact with your cluster.

> The Helm examples in this guide install the operator into the `ray-system` namespace. Adjust the namespace in commands if your installation uses a different one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: Should be addressed in latest commit.

You need to successfully install cert-manager on your Kubernetes cluster before enabling mTLS with KubeRay. See [cert-manager Installation](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/) for installation instructions.

## Enable the feature gate

> `RayClusterMTLS` is disabled by default. You must enable it on the KubeRay operator before creating RayClusters with `spec.tlsOptions.enabled: true`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

The Install the KubeRay operator part has already cover.

Author: Should be addressed in latest commit.

(kuberay-mtls)=

# Configuring mTLS for RayClusters

> KubeRay v1.7 introduces automated mutual TLS (mTLS) for RayCluster internal communication via the `RayClusterMTLS` feature gate. When enabled, the operator uses [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) to provision a full PKI (self-signed CA, head and worker leaf certificates) and injects the necessary TLS environment variables and volume mounts into every Ray container. All inter-process communication (GCS, raylet, and dashboard) is encrypted and mutually authenticated without any manual certificate management.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
KubeRay v1.7 introduces automated mutual TLS (mTLS) for RayCluster internal communication via the `RayClusterMTLS` feature gate. Ray uses TLS on its gRPC channels, which means that connecting to the Ray head requires an appropriate set of credentials and that data exchanged between various processes (client, head, workers) is encrypted. When enabled, the operator uses [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) to provision a full PKI (self-signed CA, head and worker leaf certificates) and injects the necessary TLS environment variables and volume mounts into every Ray container, so you don't need to manage certificates manually.
```

This guide covers the automated cert-manager approach. If you prefer to manage certificates yourself (for example, with your own CA or init-container scripts), see {ref}`kuberay-tls`.

:::{warning}
`RayClusterMTLS` is an **alpha** feature gate (introduced in KubeRay v1.7, `Default: false`). Enable it explicitly before use. See [Enable the feature gate](#enable-the-feature-gate) below.

Enabling TLS incurs a performance overhead from encryption and decryption of inter-process traffic. The impact is most noticeable in communication-intensive workloads (frequent large object transfers, small tasks with high invocation rates). Compute-bound workloads with minimal data movement see little to no overhead.
:::

## Prerequisites

- KubeRay operator v1.7 or later installed
- [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/) installed in the cluster

> - `kubectl` access to the cluster

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `kubectl` installed and configured to interact with your cluster.
```

The Helm examples in this guide install the operator into the `ray-system` namespace. Adjust the namespace in commands if your installation uses a different one.

Install cert-manager if not already present:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://github.com/cert-manager/cert-manager/releases/latest/download/cert-manager.yaml
# Wait for cert-manager pods to be ready
kubectl wait --for=condition=Ready pod -l app.kubernetes.io/instance=cert-manager \
  -n cert-manager --timeout=90s

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You need to successfully install cert-manager on your Kubernetes cluster before enabling mTLS with KubeRay. See [cert-manager Installation](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/) for installation instructions.
```

## Enable the feature gate

`RayClusterMTLS` is disabled by default. You must enable it on the KubeRay operator before creating RayClusters with `spec.tlsOptions.enabled: true`.

### Helm

The `featureGates` array in `values.yaml` is replaced wholesale on `helm upgrade`. The safest approach is to supply a complete override with `RayClusterMTLS` set to `true`.

**Fresh install:**

```bash
helm repo add kuberay https://ray-project.github.io/kuberay-helm/
helm repo update

helm install kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator -n ray-system --create-namespace -f - <<'EOF'
featureGates:
- name: RayClusterStatusConditions
  enabled: true
- name: RayJobDeletionPolicy
  enabled: true
- name: RayMultiHostIndexing
  enabled: true
- name: RayServiceIncrementalUpgrade
  enabled: false
- name: RayCronJob
  enabled: false
- name: RayClusterMTLS
  enabled: true
EOF

> ```

Reviewer 3: You can follow the existing documentation style

https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/e8bd0a28d660fe3f1c093ea80c53b1527b6b3ff7/doc/source/cluster/kubernetes/getting-started/raycronjob-quick-start.md?plain=1#L58-L70

**Upgrading an existing installation:**

```bash
# Export current values, edit, then upgrade
helm get values kuberay-operator -n ray-system -o yaml > current-values.yaml
# Edit current-values.yaml: set enabled: true on the RayClusterMTLS entry in featureGates
helm upgrade kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator -n ray-system -f current-values.yaml

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Remove this.

> ### Kustomize

Reviewer 3: Remove the Kustomize section.

```bash
# Operator event confirming PKI is ready
kubectl get events -n <namespace> --field-selector reason=MTLSPKIReady

# Inspect the issued certificates
kubectl get certificates -n <namespace>
kubectl describe certificate ray-head-cert-raycluster-mtls -n <namespace>

# Confirm TLS env vars are present in a Ray pod
kubectl exec -it <ray-head-pod> -n <namespace> -- env | grep RAY_TLS
```

## Certificate renewal

cert-manager automatically renews certificates before they expire. Leaf certificates are valid for 90 days and cert-manager begins renewal 15 days before expiry. However, **Ray reads TLS material only at process startup**. Running Ray processes do not hot-reload updated secrets. If cert-manager renews a certificate while the cluster is running, the pods continue using the original certificate until they are restarted.

For most workloads this is not a concern because RayClusters are typically shorter-lived than the certificate validity period. For long-lived clusters, restart Ray pods after each renewal cycle:

```bash
kubectl delete pod -l ray.io/node-type=head,ray.io/cluster=<cluster-name> -n <namespace>

> kubectl delete pods -l ray.io/node-type=worker,ray.io/cluster=<cluster-name> -n <namespace>

Reviewer 3: I think it would be good to add a warning here. @chipspeak

```

:::{note}
Future versions of KubeRay may automate pod restarts on certificate renewal. Track upstream progress in [kuberay#5048](https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/issues/5048).

> :::

Reviewer 3: I don't think KubeRay should cover pod restarts. I think it's sufficient to just mention that Ray currently does not support certificate renewal because the application only reads certificates at startup, so user need to handle that by themselves.

Author: I'll just drop this as the first paragraph now covers this anyway!
